add feature blog endpointslice (#23560)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2020-09-02-scaling-kubernetes-networking-endpointslices.md

---
layout: blog
title: 'Scaling Kubernetes Networking With EndpointSlices'
date: 2020-09-02
slug: scaling-kubernetes-networking-with-endpointslices
---

**Author:** Rob Scott (Google)

EndpointSlices are an exciting new API that provides a scalable and extensible alternative to the Endpoints API. EndpointSlices track IP addresses, ports, readiness, and topology information for Pods backing a Service.

> In Kubernetes 1.19 this feature is be enabled by default with kube-proxy reading from [EndpointSlices](/docs/concepts/services-networking/endpoint-slices/) instead of Endpoints. Although this will mostly be an invisible change, it should result in noticeable scalability improvements in large clusters. It also enables significant new features in future Kubernetes releases like Topology Aware Routing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes 1.19 this feature is be enabled by default with kube-proxy reading from [EndpointSlices](/docs/concepts/services-networking/endpoint-slices/) instead of Endpoints. Although this will mostly be an invisible change, it should result in noticeable scalability improvements in large clusters. It also enables significant new features in future Kubernetes releases like [Topology Aware Routing](/docs/concepts/services-networking/service-topology/).
```
Not a blocker, but figure it'd be good to link out if anyone is interested :)

> In Kubernetes 1.19 this feature is be enabled by default with kube-proxy reading from [EndpointSlices](/docs/concepts/services-networking/endpoint-slices/) instead of Endpoints. Although this will mostly be an invisible change, it should result in noticeable scalability improvements in large clusters. It also enables significant new features in future Kubernetes releases like [Topology Aware Routing](/docs/concepts/services-networking/service-topology/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes 1.19 this feature is enabled by default with kube-proxy reading from [EndpointSlices](/docs/concepts/services-networking/endpoint-slices/) instead of Endpoints. Although this will mostly be an invisible change, it should result in noticeable scalability improvements in large clusters. It also enables significant new features in future Kubernetes releases like [Topology Aware Routing](/docs/concepts/services-networking/service-topology/).
```

Consider an example where a Service is backed by 15 pods. We'd end up with a single Endpoints resource that tracked all of them. If EndpointSlices were configured to store 5 endpoints each, we'd end up with 3 different EndpointSlices:
![EndpointSlices](/images/blog/2020-09-02-scaling-kubernetes-networking-endpointslices/endpoint-slices.png)

By default, EndpointSlices  store as many as 100 endpoints each, though this can be configured with the `--max-endpoints-per-slice` flag on kube-controller-manager.

## EndpointSlices provide 10x scalability improvements
This API dramatically improves networking scalability. Now when a Pod is added or removed, only 1 small EndpointSlice needs to be updated. This difference becomes quite noticeable when hundreds or thousands of Pods are backing a single Service. 

Potentially more significant, now that all Pod IPs for a Service don't need to be stored in a single resource, we don't have to worry about the size limit for objects stored in etcd. EndpointSlices have already been used to scale Services beyond 100,000 network endpoints.

> All of this is brought together with some significant performance improvements that have been made in kube-proxy. When using EndpointSlices at scale, significantly less data will be transferred for endpoints updates and kube-proxy should be faster to update iptables or ipvs rules. Beyond that, Services can now scale to at least 10 times any previous limitations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All of this is brought together with some significant performance improvements that have been made in kube-proxy. When using EndpointSlices at scale, significantly less data will be transferred for endpoints updates and kube-proxy should be faster to update iptables or ipvs rules. Beyond that, Services can now scale to at least 10 times beyond any previous limitations.
```

## EndpointSlices enable new functionality

> Introduced as an alpha feature in Kubernetes v1.18, EndpointSlices were built to enable some exciting new functionality in future Kubernetes releases. This could include dual-stack Services, topology aware routing, and endpoint subsetting.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Introduced as an alpha feature in Kubernetes v1.16, EndpointSlices were built to enable some exciting new functionality in future Kubernetes releases. This could include dual-stack Services, topology aware routing, and endpoint subsetting.
```

Topology aware routing will update kube-proxy to prefer routing requests within the same zone or region. This makes use of the topology fields stored for each endpoint in an EndpointSlice. As a further refinement of that, we're exploring the potential of endpoint subsetting. This would allow kube-proxy to only watch a subset of EndpointSlices. For example, this might be combined with topology aware routing so that kube-proxy would only need to watch EndpointSlices containing endpoints within the same zone. This would provide another very significant scalability improvement.

## What does this mean for the Endpoints API?
Although the EndpointSlice API is providing a newer and more scalable alternative to the Endpoints API, the Endpoints API will continue to be considered generally available and stable. The most significant change planned for the Endpoints API will involve beginning to truncate Endpoints that would otherwise run into scalability issues.

> The Endpoints API is not going away, but many new features will rely on the EndpointSlice API. To take advantage of the new scalability and functionality that EndpointSlices provide, applications that currently consume Endpoints will likely want to consider switching to EndpointSlices in the future.

Reviewer 3: we might want to encourage them to switch _once endpointslices reach v1_... the effort to switch twice (to beta, then to v1) might be more than we want to push

Reviewer 2: That's a good point. What are the pain points involved in transitioning from v1beta1 to v1? Would it just be updating some client/informer calls?

I'm a bit hesitant to suggest that all implementations wait until EndpointSlices reach v1. I think it could be helpful to have some more early adopters of the API so that we can smooth out any pain points in time for the v1 API. My goal here was to be relatively vague - encouraging adoption of the API in the future without being too specific or pushing for a certain transition timeline.

When an application starts to support EndpointSlices will likely be dependent on the user base and implementation goals. In many cases, applications will go through a phase where they support both APIs (assuming they support a wide range of Kubernetes versions). For those cases, getting initial opt-in implementations in place sooner than later could be helpful. That's especially true if it helps us uncover any shortcomings of the API before it graduates to v1.

Do you think there's a better way to communicate this? Not quite sure what updated wording might look like here without getting too detailed or prescriptive.

Reviewer 3: If they actually keep supporting/fallback to endpoints/v1 in parallel, that seems ok, but I've seen components switch to a new beta API without really considering scenarios where the beta API is not available.

Reviewer 2: That's a good point, maybe a better way to say this is "consider supporting EndpointSlices in the future" instead of "switching to".

Author: edit this last sentence @robscott @liggitt

> Although the Endpoints API is not going away, many new features will be enabled by the EndpointSlice API. To take advantage of the new scalability and functionality that EndpointSlices provide, applications that currently consume Endpoints will likely want to consider switching to EndpointSlices in the future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Endpoints API is not going away, but many new features will rely on the EndpointSlice API. To take advantage of the new scalability and functionality that EndpointSlices provide, applications that currently consume Endpoints will likely want to consider switching to EndpointSlices in the future.
```

---
layout: blog
title: 'Scaling Kubernetes Networking With EndpointSlices'
date: 2020-09-02

> slug: scaling-kubernetes-networking-with-endpointSlices

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
slug: scaling-kubernetes-networking-with-endpointslices
```

---

**Author:** Rob Scott (Google)

EndpointSlices are an exciting new API that provides a scalable and extensible alternative to the Endpoints API. EndpointSlices track IP addresses, ports, readiness, and topology information for Pods backing a Service.

> In Kubernetes 1.19 this feature will be enabled by default with kube-proxy reading from [EndpointSlices](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/endpoint-slices/) instead of Endpoints. Although this will mostly be an invisible change, it should result in noticeable scalability improvements in large clusters. It will also enable significant new features in future Kubernetes releases like Topology Aware Routing.

Reviewer 4: 1. Kubernetes v1.19 is already released, so I recommend tweaking the wording.
2. Better to link to `/docs/concepts/services-networking/endpoint-slices/`
3. EndpointSlice is naturally singular whereas Endpoints is naturally plural, so I'd change the link text to EndpointSlice and add “objects”.

Reviewer 2: 1. Does "is" or "has been" work here?
2. Good catch, thanks!
3. To clarify, should all plural EndpointSlice references be stated as "EndpointSlice resources"? Is this just an issue on line 12 because EndpointSlices are being contrasted with Endpoints? I'd thought I might be able to get away with it here since the plural of both names is used but admit it could be confusing.

## Scalability Limitations of the Endpoints API 

> With the Endpoints API, there was only one Endpoint resource for a Service. That meant that it needed to be able to store IP addresses and ports (network endpoints) for every Pod that was backing the corresponding Service. This resulted in huge API resources. To compound this problem, kube-proxy was running on every node and watching for any updates to Endpoints resources. If even a single network endpoint changed in an Endpoints resource, the whole object would have to be sent to each of those instances of kube-proxy.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
With the Endpoints API, there was only one Endpoints resource for a Service. That meant that it needed to be able to store IP addresses and ports (network endpoints) for every Pod that was backing the corresponding Service. This resulted in huge API resources. To compound this problem, kube-proxy was running on every node and watching for any updates to Endpoints resources. If even a single network endpoint changed in an Endpoints resource, the whole object would have to be sent to each of those instances of kube-proxy.
```
because an Endpoints can contain multiple endpoints. You don't create one Endpoint for each Pod in a Deployment.

Author: @robscott something for you to verifiy :)

Reviewer 2: Wow, it took me too long to find the difference there :). "Endpoint -> Endpoints" is a great catch, thanks!

## Splitting endpoints up with the EndpointSlice API
The EndpointSlice API was designed to address this issue with an approach similar to sharding. Instead of tracking all Pod IPs for a Service with a single Endpoints resource, we split them into multiple smaller EndpointSlices. 

Consider an example where a Service is backed by 15 pods. We'd end up with a single Endpoints resource that tracked all of them. If EndpointSlices were configured to store 5 endpoints each, we'd end up with 3 different EndpointSlices:
![EndpointSlices](/images/blog/2020-09-02-scaling-kubernetes-networking-endpointslices/endpoint-slices.png)

> By default, EndpointSlices will store as many as 100 endpoints each, though this can be configured with the --max-endpoints-per-slice flag on kube-controller-manager.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
By default, EndpointSlices  store as many as 100 endpoints each, though this can be configured with the `--max-endpoints-per-slice` flag on kube-controller-manager.
```

## EndpointSlices provide 10x scalability improvements
This API dramatically improves networking scalability. Now when a Pod is added or removed, only 1 small EndpointSlice needs to be updated. This difference becomes quite noticeable when hundreds or thousands of Pods are backing a single Service. 

Potentially more significant, now that all Pod IPs for a Service don't need to be stored in a single resource, we don't have to worry about the size limit for objects stored in etcd. EndpointSlices have already been used to scale Services beyond 100,000 network endpoints.

> All of this is brought together with some significant performance improvements that have been made in kube-proxy. When using EndpointSlices at scale, significantly less data will be transferred for endpoints updates and kube-proxy should be faster to update iptables or ipvs rules. Beyond that, Services can now scale at least 10x beyond any previous limitations.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
All of this is brought together with some significant performance improvements that have been made in kube-proxy. When using EndpointSlices at scale, significantly less data will be transferred for endpoints updates and kube-proxy should be faster to update iptables or ipvs rules. Beyond that, Services can now scale to at least 10 times any previous limitations.
```
(minor thing - I prefer not to use “*” or “x” to mean multiplication when writing for a less technical audience). `10×` is another option here.

## EndpointSlices enable new functionality

> As a new API, EndpointSlices were built to enable some exciting new functionality in future Kubernetes releases. This will include dual-stack Services, topology aware routing, and endpoint subsetting.

Reviewer 4: ```suggesiton
Introduced as an alpha feature in Kubernetes v1.18, EndpointSlices were built to enable some exciting new functionality in future Kubernetes releases. This could include dual-stack Services, topology aware routing, and endpoint subsetting.
```

(_could_ not _will_ because these aren't firm commitments)

Reviewer 2: Good catch, thanks!

Dual-Stack Services are an exciting new feature that has been in development alongside EndpointSlices. They will utilize both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses for Services and rely on the addressType field on EndpointSlices to track these addresses by IP family. 

Topology aware routing will update kube-proxy to prefer routing requests within the same zone or region. This makes use of the topology fields stored for each endpoint in an EndpointSlice. As a further refinement of that, we're exploring the potential of endpoint subsetting. This would allow kube-proxy to only watch a subset of EndpointSlices. For example, this might be combined with topology aware routing so that kube-proxy would only need to watch EndpointSlices containing endpoints within the same zone. This would provide another very significant scalability improvement.

## What does this mean for the Endpoints API?

> Although the EndpointSlice API is providing a newer and more scalable alternative to the Endpoints API, the Endpoints API will continue to be considered generally available and stable. The most significant change planned for the Endpoints API will involve beginning to truncate Endpoints that would otherwise run into scalability issues.

Reviewer 4: Not sure what the deprecation policy is here is but I think a stable API like Endpoints might be considered stable throughout the 1.x.x major version series? If so, let's make that clear.

Reviewer 2: Good catch. I'd thought that all GA APIs are guaranteed to be stable for all 1.x releases, but can't find anything in the docs directly stating that. The official [deprecation policy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/) seems to indicate that a GA API can be removed as early as 1 year after deprecation. I'm unaware of any plans to deprecate the Endpoints API though and do not think it will happen. I'm just hesitant to commit to something not happening since I don't actually control it.

Maybe @johnbelamaric has some guidance here on what we can/can't say about the Endpoints API. My understanding is that it will continue to be supported indefinitely. As a GA API can we guarantee that it will continue to be supported for all 1.x releases?

Reviewer 5: We don't really follow [semver](https://semver.org/), it theoretically could be removed according to the deprecation policy that Rob links.

Author: any suggestions for edit or shall we leave it like it is?

Reviewer 2: I can't think of a great way to improve this. Mentioning that "we currently have no plans to deprecate Endpoints" may actually result in readers becoming concerned about future deprecation of this API. On the other we may regret a stronger statement if a year from now we end up deprecating the API. (I don't think that will happen, it's just always dangerous to commit to something never happening).

Reviewer 4: > API elements may only be removed by incrementing the version of the API group.

So you might find that Endpoints v1 gets removed but I presume only in favor of Endpoints v2.

Is there any way _ever_ to remove Endpoints? Sounds like that might need a KEP!

Reviewer 2: Yeah that's where I got confused as far as the deprecation policy as well. It seemed to only cover deprecating a GA API if a replacement/newer version existed. I'm not sure if EndpointSlices would qualify as a direct replacement or not.
